====================== 
[                    ] 
[       Realm        ] 
[  Front End v.2.4b  ]
[                    ]
======================

Options available are:
0: Quit the system.
1: Play Realm.
2: Change persona.
3: Access Coders' menu.
4: Game help.
5: Read latest information.
6: Delete persona.
======================
[                    ]
[    Coders' Menu    ]
[                    ]
======================

0: Return to main menu.
1: Reset the game.
2: Get system status.
3: Read Coders' latest info.
4: Shut down system.
5: Read log file.
6: Broadcast message.
7: Edit persona file.
As you watch your computer screen you suddenly become aware that something 
very strange is happening. Your surroundings start to shift and blur. Great 
cracks open in the walls and ceiling, and mist swirls around you until your 
vision is completely obscured. Then you get an impression of swift movement, 
and through the mist you catch glimpses of green hills and a blue sky. In a 
few seconds your feet touch firm ground and the mist begins to clear. The 
world still seems to be spinning around you, but in a few seconds this 
stops and you are able to survey your new surroundings...
Gradually your vision begins to blur and fade. The mist swirls around you 
once more, and in a few seconds you are back in front of your computer.
In a few seconds a tree has sprung from the ground. It grows tall, sends out 
leaves and blossom, and brings forth fruit. Then it sinks back into the earth. 
Only its fruit remain.
You discover you cannot remove your hand from the lever. You are trapped!
As you move towards the southern exit a beam of light shoots from the doorway. 
It strikes you and you find yourself immobile - your limbs stiffen and in 
seconds you have turned to stone - just one more statue in the Statue Room!
That last blow was too much for you and you slump to the ground. You have a 
last sight of your enemy leering down at you, then consciousness fades... 
As you awake you feel weaker. You realise you have lost half your points.
You have perished but fortunately it is possible to return you to life without
 loss of points. Beware - next time you may not be so lucky...
You are seized by the ogre's horny hands and turned round. Then a terrific 
impact strikes you sending you hurtling into the air. You land a few minutes 
later with a crash that knocks the wind out of you.
"As reward for your valour" he intones "the Guild of Artisans has decided 
to offer you the chance to change your Class. You will now be transported 
to the Guild Chamber, where you must make your decision." He touches you 
with the butt of his staff and there is a flash. You are elsewhere...
The gryphon lifts its head and gives a great cry, then falls to the ground. 
One last drop of blood falls from its body into the snow, freezing in 
seconds. You bend to examine it. It has become a ruby!
With a rending, splintering crash the ice falls to the ground.
As you say the magic words the rock falls into fragments!
You cannot cast that spell - you are not of the proper character class.
You fail to get the spell to work correctly.
Ok. Now stick around for a few hundred years and you might see some result! 
These things take a long time to grow, you know...
You sweep the snow away with the broom, revealing an amethyst!
That's right, keep the Realm tidy! But there's not much to sweep here.
There's a large galleon here, which you could board via a rope ladder.
A mass of ice, rock and snow hangs overhead, looking extremely precarious.
A large hole has been melted in the ice, and you could go through.
There's a gaping hole in the stone of the tower wall - you can go in.
A large boulder blocks the cave entrance.
The egg breaks harmlessly far below.
The egg bursts giving off noxious fumes! You fall to the ground...
That spell's too difficult to cast during a fight - it requires 
concentration which you can't give it at the moment.
You have over - reached your magical strength. With horror you feel 
your power slipping away from you... you are no longer a magic user.
You make a small hole in the sand, but find nothing.
You make quite a deep hole in the sand, but discover nothing.
Burrowing frantically into the sand you find a golden coin!
A crowd of kobold miners, armed with pickaxes and shovels, stand talking 
by the eastern exit. They appear not to have noticed you, as yet...
As you try to ascend the throne a voice booms out. "Who dares mount the 
Throne of Kings without the insignia of royalty! Perish, mortal!" A bolt of 
lightning spears down and strikes you, and you crash from the throne to 
the flagstones below in charred ruin, stone dead.
As you mount the Throne of Kings the crown, sceptre and orb vanish but you 
feel a warm glow of well-being and pride at your achievement.
This system is under development. For the moment, please use the online
help (type HELP once you're actually playing).

As you enter the room you seem to feel something pass across your face, and 
you hear the faint sound of evil, mocking laughter. Something is wrong...
You can't do that, don't be daft!
That's not around at the moment.
You haven't got that.
You are not allowed to use this command with your current status.
You haven't got the right object to do that with.
You must choose one of the five races shown. Human is the standard, and 
has access to all four character classes, one of which you'll choose in a 
moment. Elves are more nimble and dexterous than humans, but less strong; 
they cannot choose to start the game as Priests. Dwarves, on the other 
hand, are strong but clumsier than Men, and cannot start as Wizards or 
Rangers. Half-orcs are for those who want to be evil - they are stronger 
than humans, but will never be accepted for training by the Wizards' Guild 
or the priesthood - and halflings are small and weak but much more dexterous 
than humans, and can start as Rangers or Wizards. 
The most common class for beginners is Warrior; unlike the other three, 
warriors have no special abilities, but they can acquire them in the course 
of the game. Rangers are dexterous and keen-eyed and have certain special 
powers, but are less strong than Warriors. A Wizard is not very good in 
combat, but has a large range of spells available to him/her, while Priests 
are better in combat but cannot use edged weapons and have less spells.
The volcano in the southwest of the Realm quakes violently and Nanjusi flies 
up surrounded by five demons. The demons bow quickly and depart leaving their 
master behind.
Suddenly Nanjusi speaks a few words of power and a massive column of flame 
engulfs him, returning him to the depths of Hell.
 points a finger at you and speaks a few words of power. With a flash of 
unbelievable energy your bones jangle and crack into pieces. You fall to 
the ground in a heap of sinews!
Looking over the edge of the tower you see the ogre below catch it neatly 
as it falls and place it gently on the ground. He looks up and chuckles.
The ogre positions himself underneath ready for a perfect catch - then 
realises how much it's going to hurt him if he tries. Quickly he speaks 
a word of power and vanishes in a cloud of dirty black smoke.
Looking over the edge of the tower you see the ogre point a finger at 
the descending egg and speak a word of command. It changes direction in 
mid-flight and hurtles towards you. You try to dodge, but too late...
Crying "Death before dishonour" you swallow the capsule. In a few seconds the 
poison is coursing through your veins - a few more, and you are unconscious.
Suddenly you find yourself in ice-cold water! Frantically you thrash and 
shout, trying to reach dry land, but your swimming talents are minimal. As you 
gasp for breath water rushes into your lungs and you sink. Consciousness fades.
You are engulfed in red-hot lava! You struggle briefly, then howl in agony 
as the heat strips your flesh from your bones. Death comes swiftly...
A faint sound above of metal on rock from above makes you glance upwards. 
Instinctively you throw yourself aside as a huge boulder hurtles towards 
you - but you are too late. You never hear the crash as it hits the ground.
A particularly thick patch of the acrid fumes from the lake swirls across 
your face, and you incautiously breathe in. Your head begins to swim - you 
try feebly to escape but your strength, and your consciousness, are fading...
You make a dash across the gantry, but as you reach the centre the pendulum 
slices across, striking you and sending you hurtling to the hard earth below.
You step incautiously into the centre of the mud, and your weight drags you 
down - as you struggle you only sink deeper, until the mud is over your head.
The tree waits until you're securely in place before its branches close in, 
enfolding you in an inescapable embrace. Then it starts to squeeze...
As you move down the passage a thin, almost invisible wire catches you at 
ankle level. Suddenly you are smashed to the ground by a hail of heavy rocks 
falling from the ceiling. Crushed and trapped, you cannot survive for long...
Digging in the ash and dust, you discover a very large nugget of electrum, 
created when the intense heat melted a heap of coins together.
You grub around in the dust, getting filthy but discovering nothing.
You judge the speed of the wheel, then leap nimbly onto the next passing 
chair. The wheel carries you gently up, affording a wonderful view of the 
surrounding lands. To your north you can see a small village, and far away 
to the west a mountain rises. The area directly below you is mainly occupied 
by a large tent. Beyond this to the west you can see some small caravans. 
The whole area is surrounded by a high fence, the only exit being a small turn
stile. Feeling suddenly nauseated by the motion, you return to the firm ground.
You walk gingerly onto the rope and try a few steps. To your dismay you are 
unable to balance properly and, as the rope sways treacherously beneath you, 
you lose your footing and plummet downwards, ripping a hole in the rotten 
safety net as you plunge towards the hard ground which comes up to meet you...
You walk gingerly onto the rope and try a few steps. It sways treacherously 
but using the long pole you are able to balance. You shuffle forwards, your 
eyes fixed firmly on the platform ahead, not daring to look up or down. 
You breathe a sigh of relief as you reach the other side, and look around.
You try to swim down, but find that your lung capacity is not up to it.
Frantically kicking you return to the surface, gasping for air.
As you place the top-hat on your head, an eldritch voice whispers "You'll 
like this... But not a lot." You feel a peculiar tingling sensation. The 
last thoughts that go through your mind as you lick your furry white paws 
clean, are of lettuce, and procreation. Then consciousness fades...
Suddenly an old man stands before you. His beard is long and white and on 
his head there gleams a circlet of silver. In his left hand is a tall staff 
which glows with a bright light: his right hand holds a great book. 
"Congratulations, adventurer!" he cries. "You have reached the standards 
of Immortality, and I welcome you to the elite of the Realm. I hereby 
confer upon you the powers of an Immortal. Use them wisely!" With that he 
touches you with the end of his staff, and you feel a surge of power pass 
through you. Images pass before your eyes and knowledge enters your mind. 
When you are able to see the Realm again, the old man is gone.
You dig deep into the sand with your bare hands, but find nothing interesting.
You cast the spell correctly, but something prevents it from taking effect.
