Contents


Contents	1
Credits	1
Introduction to Realm	2
The Front End	2
Doing things in Realm	4
Getting around the land	4
Using objects	5
Treasure and point-scoring	5
Levels and ranks	6
Attributes	7
The rest of your SCORE	7
Mobiles	8
The other players	9
Interaction	9
The fight system	10
Selecting a weapon	11
Starting a blow	11
Stamina and death	12
Ranger abilities	14
Magic users and spell-casting	15
The Spell Book	15
Spells available to all magic users	16
Wizards' Spells	17
Priests' Spells	19
How to cope with Immortality	21
Hints and Tips	22
Useful commands	23
Simplest commands	23
`Emotes'	23
Spells for all	23
Wizards' Spells	23
Priests' Spells	23
Immortals' Spells	23
Realm Glossary	24

Credits

This guide was written by Martin Hardcastle and illustrated by Tim Hard-
castle. Realm was programmed by Martin Hardcastle; portions were designed
by Tim Hardcastle, Darrell Rowbottom, Wally Beben and Rich Howarth. I
would also like to thank Al Winton, Phil Hardcastle, Andrew Black and the
players on Compunet for their help and suggestions, and Pete Chown for his
invaluable help in porting the game onto Phoenix.

This is the second version of the Guide, which has been extended and revi-
sed.

Introduction to Realm

Realm is a multi-user game; that is, it's a game which many people can play
and enjoy simultaneously. It's set in a world very like Tolkien's Middle
Earth (or the setting of many other `fantasy' or `sword and sorcery' novels)
- a world where magic works and heroes are as common as the monsters
they slay, where there are few natural laws; a world which can change and
grow with its inhabitants.

The Realm itself can be thought of as a land which was once prosperous
and populated, but which has been devastated due to natural disaster and
overrun by nasties of the worst kind. It can be divided into ten main areas;
the Land, the abbey, the Coldlands, the City, the mines, the sea, Hamlet's
Castle, the Palace, Hamlet's Caverns and the Village/Circus area. Naturally
all these places are stiff with treasure left behind by the former inhabitants
- which is, of course, where you come in...

The object of Realm is to amass points by collecting this treasure (and by
doing other things which we'll come to in a moment) in order to rise to be-
come Immortal. The Immortals - who include Witches and Wizards, Arch-
Priests and Arch-Priestesses, Guardians, Superheroes and Superheroines,
and the more powerful Demigods and Demigoddesses, can be thought of as
the real powers in the land - they can control virtually any feature of the
game. (There are also Gods, who are more powerful still and work mostly
behind the scenes.) Being Immortal gives you great power over the other
people and creatures of Realm.

However, you start off as a lowly first level character and have a lot to do
to work your way up to these dizzy heights. You are cast, (as in many ad-
venture games), as a typical greedy and bloodthirsty character, and you
have to go around the land collecting valuables, solving puzzles, and inter-
acting with the other players and the computer-controlled `mobiles.' The
next few pages will give you some idea of how you go about this, starting
with a brief description of the `front end' or user interface of Realm.

The Front End

The part of the program that you'll see first is the Front End - this is the
bit that allows you to create personae, send messages, read information and
so on without actually playing the game.

The first thing you'll have to do on connection to Realm - whether through
another system or directly via the 'phone - is to identify yourself to the
computer by entering a persona name (that is, a name of a player whose
actions you'll be controlling when you start the game). If you don't already
have a persona on Realm, you can simply make up a new one by typing in a
name that hasn't already been used by someone else when prompted. For
example:

Please enter a persona name: FRED <RETURN>
Is this a new persona? Y <RETURN>

You'll then be prompted by the computer to enter various details about how
you want this persona to start. First you'll be asked what sex you want to
be - fairly straightforward, there's a choice of two!

Next the computer will ask you to choose a race - Human, Elf, Dwarf, Hal-
forc or Halfling. To those who've read any `sword and sorcery' fiction or
played a r“le-playing game like Dungeons & Dragons, these races will be fa-
miliar, and on-line help is available at this point by pressing <RETURN>. Ba-
sically Humans are the standard and the average, Elves are more dexterous
and nimble but weaker, Dwarves are stronger and sturdier than humans
(and smaller) but less dexterous, Halforcs are simply evil humanoid types
who tend to be stronger than the average but are shunned by all right-
thinking folk, and Halflings are a lot smaller and more dexterous - but much
weaker.

Your choice of race will also affect your choice of character class, which
comes next - the four classes currently available are Warrior, Ranger, Magic
user (sometimes called Wizard) and Priest, but not all these classes are
available to every race. Again the online help will explain this. Briefly,
though, Warriors are the standard class - they have no special abilities
whatsoever but start off fairly strong and fit compared to the other classes.
Rangers tend to be dexterous and good with throwing weapons and bows
(and at things like theft where dexterity is an advantage). They have cer-
tain special abilities. Magic users - as their name suggests - can cast a wi-
de range of spells (see Magic, later), but to start off a magic user means
being fairly weak in combat - especially as some of the more powerful
spells aren't available to low level personae. Priests can also cast spells
(though there are less of these available) and they start off stronger than
Wizards, though there are certain restrictions on them - they may not use
edged weapons, for example. The other important thing to note about this
choice is that only Warriors will be offered the chance to change classes (to
Priest, Wizard or Ranger) at a later date. No other class can do this except
by the will of the Gods.

Having chosen a race, the computer will ask if you're sure about your deci-
sions. If you are, you'll be prompted for a password. This will ensure that
no-one else can use your persona. (A password is not used on some
systems.) You're then ready to play Realm, and are shown the main menu of
Realm options.

(If you have already created a persona, then you simply have to type in the
persona name and press <RETURN> when asked for a persona name : then
type in the password that goes with it and press <RETURN> again. After a
short pause you should see a menu giving you choices about your next mo-
ve.)

The options available will include a chance to leave the system, an option to
read the latest information about Realm (usually worth a look, as it'll tell
you the latest changes in the program), a way of accessing the messaging
system, an option `Change user identity' or something similar (this is only
useful if you have two or more personae, since it puts you back at the
`Enter a persona name' prompt) and, of course, an option to play the game.

(Before describing this, though, the message system is worth a mention. Al-
though there are many ways of exchanging messages outside the game
system, the program's own messaging system is the only one that allows you
to send messages to other players without knowing who they are in the real
world. You only need to know their persona name. This makes player-player
interaction a lot easier. The feature is not available on some online
systems.)

Having selected the option `Play Realm', though, you will receive a set of
messages telling you where you are and what you're doing, and then you're
off...

Doing things in Realm

When you first find yourself connected to the game you'll be in a totally
unfamiliar situation. The program will tell you where you are and what (or
who) you can see. It then asks you for a command by printing the prompt
character `>'. This is your cue to do something. Chances are if you just
stand around at this point some monster will wander up and have you for
lunch, so we'd better start by describing how to move.

Getting around the land

The commands described here will be familiar to anyone who's played a
single-user adventure (or another MUG!) To move from your current location
you just type a direction of the compass (followed by a press on the RE-
TURN or ENTER key, which is needed after every command to indicate that
it's finished and send it to the computer for processing). For example....

Clearing.

You are standing in a large grassy clearing with tree-stumps dotted around.
To the north is a great forest, which spreads round to west and east; to
the south is a tall cliff, the north face of a huge mountain, in which is set
a strong iron gate. Paths lead off into grassland to the southwest and sou-
theast, and a narrow track leads into the forest to the north.

A large canvas sack lies here.

>NORTH <RETURN>

Forest path.

You are standing at a fork in a forest path, just a few paces in from
a clearing to the south....

and so on. In practice people tend to abbreviate the directions to the first
couple of meaningful letters : N for north, SE for southeast, and so on.
There are also a few others; U (for UP) and D (for DOWN) are fairly ob-
vious, IN will generally take you through doors and such like, while OUT
(abbreviated to O) from most locations takes you towards the Clearing in the
centre of the game (see the Map for more details).

There are other ways of getting around the game. The Wizard spells ZIP,
MOVE and SUMMON (see later for information about spells) allow people to be
moved round the land, there is a teleport system connecting some of the
more far-flung areas to one another, and certain mobiles will cause you to
move around if you let them. You are also allowed to FOLLOW people, though
they may shake you off with the LOSE command. Walking is probably the ea-
siest method of getting around, though.

(It's worth remembering that the BRIEF command (B for short) will allow you
to turn off the long descriptions of locations, enabling you to get around a
lot faster. VERBOSE or V will turn them back on again.)

Using objects

Obviously being able to explore is not much use on its own; you'll see
things lying around which you'll want to grab. The command to pick some-
thing up is GET <object> or TAKE <object> (for example, GET SACK) : GET
can be shortened to G if you're in a hurry, and most object names can be
abbreviated (e.g. G SWO to pick up the sword). Similarly to get rid of some-
thing you're carrying use DROP <object> and to get a list of what you're
carrying type INVENTORY (which abbreviates to INV or just I). Carrying ob-
jects will tire you (decreasing your strength, so that you may find yourself
dropping things) and make you clumsier, decreasing dexterity. See the `At-
tributes' section, later.

You'll soon reach the stage where you want to do things to more than one
object : there are a range of special words, called categories, which allow
you to do this. ALL is the most general one; typing GET ALL will pick up
everything in the location, while DROP ALL will get rid of everything you're
carrying, and so on. The category that's used most often is TREASURE,
usually abbreviated to T, which applies to anything valuable (that is, any-
thing worth points - see later) but other categories include MOBILE (any
monster or creature of the land) WEAPON, FOOD, FRUIT, COIN, ORC and so
on. Using the KEEP command exempts the named object or category from the
DROP, GIVE or PUT commands if these are used with a category (eg DROP T
wouldn't get rid of the staff if you had used KEEP STAFF previously, even
though the staff is part of the category TREASURE).

So what can you do with these objects, once you've got them? There's a
long list of object manipulation commands, most of which are `intuitive' in
operation; if you've just picked up the crown, you can WEAR CROWN, for ex-
ample, and if you've found the candle, you can LIGHT CANDLE. If you've got
a mug of beer, try DRINK BEER; if you're in the right place you can then
FILL MUG WITH BEER and carry on drinking! Try typing HELP /U from the
'>' prompt for a full list of the most useful commands, which is also shown
in smaller form at the end of this Guide. (The HELP command on its own will
provide you with a whole list of options, all of which are worth looking at.)

   Treasure and point-scoring

What do you do with treasure, once you've found it? What you normally do
with your `T' (as you'll hear people call it) is drop it in the lake at the top
of the mountain in the centre of the Realm (see the Map again). You'd think
any adventurer worth his salt would go and stash it away in a bank vault
somewhere, but dropping it in the lake scores you points, and scoring
points is the object of the exercise. If you type SCORE (SC for short) you'll
be able to find out how many points you've currently amassed. A typical
SCORE is shown below - the other pieces of information on the score are
discussed later.

Axeman the permanent Mage
Level 11 male dwarvish magic user
Score		: 199182
Value/killed	: 16598
Strength		: 222/230
Dexterity		: 233/233
Stamina		: 229/236
Magic stamina	: 163/228
Charisma		: 2
Kills			: 188
Weight held	: 38
Spellls		: glowing

Chances are that at this stage your score won't be very high, but each pie-
ce of treasure that you drop in the lake increases it by a specific amount
(you also get score bonuses for fighting and for solving certain puzzles).
You can find out what a particular piece of `T' is worth by doing VALUE
<object> (or VALUE ALL, VALUE T, etc). You may be interested to see the
top scorers in the Realm at the moment: you can do this by typing LEAGUE
SCORE.

Levels and ranks

You'll also see on your score your name and a rank (Fred the Peasant, Su-
san the Druidess, etc. : Axeman is a Mage, in the example above). Your rank
name is called your level and you start off as a Peasant, Serf, Learner, Be-
ginner, Apprentice, Initiate, Novice or Neophyte (depending on your sex and
character class). As you score points, you'll rise through the levels gaining
power, strength and prestige en route. As mentioned before the ultimate
goal is Immortality, requiring a score of a mere 204,800 points. The table
below shows you the variety of levels and the scores needed to achieve
them: a similar table is available by typing LEVELS online.

		Warrior		Ranger		Wizard		Priest
	Score	Male	Female	Male	Female	Male	Female	Male	 Female
	0	Peasant	Serf	Learner	Beginner	Apprentice	Apprentice	Novice 	 Neophyte
	200	Quester	Seeker	Scout	Searcher	Conjurer	Diviner	Initiate	 Initiate
	400	Adventurer	Adventuress	Acrobat	Tumbler	Sage	Adept	Acolyte	 Acolyte
	800	Fighter	Fighter	Thief	Pickpocket	Seer	Seeress	Cleric	 Cleric
	1600	Combatteer	Amazon	Archer	Archer	Soothsayer	Soothsayer	Mystic	 Mystic
	3200	Valiant	Valiant	Marksman	Markswoman	Warlock	Spellweaver	Monk	 Monk
	6400	Knight	Swordswoman	Ranger	Ranger	Sorcerer	Sorceress	Oracle	 Oracle
	12800	Paladin	Paladin	Yeoman	Yeowoman	Enchanter	Enchantress	Priest	 Priestess
	25600	Hero	Heroine	Assassin	Assassin	Magician	Illusionist	Druid	 Druidess
	51200	Champion	Champion	Ninja	Ninja	Necromancer	Summoner	Hierarch	 Hierarch
102400	Master Warrior	Master Ranger	Mage	Thaumaturge	High Priest	 /ess
204800	Superhero	Superheroine	Guardian     Guardian	Wizard	Witch	Arch-Priest	 /ess

(It's possible that these level names may change, but this table gives the
general idea.)

Attributes

This is the name given to the numbers (such as strength, dexterity and sta-
mina) shown on your score sheet (type SC or QS). Together with your score
they help to determine how powerful a figure you are in Realm. The four
main attributes or `prime attributes' - strength, dexterity, stamina and ma-
gic stamina or (for Rangers) concentration - tend to range between 0 and
about 300, and they increase as you go up levels (and, of course, decrease
should you go back down a level or two!) These four are described here in
some detail.

Your strength - obviously - describes how strong you are, and determines
how much you can carry: Realm weight units are geared so that you cannot
carry more weight than your current strength. Your strength has a `cur-
rent' and a `maximum' value; in the example shown, Axeman's current
strength is 222 while his maximum strength is 230. The current value will
fall below the maximum when you carry heavy loads, fight, cast powerful
spells, or simply over-exert yourself, and if it falls too low you will fall
unconscious. As your strength gets lower you will find yourself dropping
objects. The `current' value may actually exceed the maximum when some
Ranger abilities are used: see below.

Your dexterity shows how agile you are, how good you are at stealing ob-
jects, throwing weapons, shooting bows and so on. It's a measure of your
skill with your hands, and - together with strength - has a large influence
on how well you fight (see later). Its `current' value is usually more or less
the same as its `maximum' - carrying bulky objects reduces your dexterity,
though, for obvious reasons.

Your stamina is a measure of your physical health and well-being. Its `cur-
rent' value drops when you are hurt or wounded in combat, and is never
greater than its `maximum' value. If it falls below zero, you die!

Magic stamina and Concentration are discussed in the section on Spell ca-
sting and Ranger abilities, respectively. Suffice it to say at the moment that
these determine your current and maximum capacity for using magic / Ran-
ger abilities. Warriors do not have this attribute and it does not appear in
their score.

Finally all the prime attributes (except dexterity) can be increased, if they
are low, by SLEEPing (which takes you out of circulation for a while) or by
EATing food. There are also other, more exotic methods...

The rest of your SCORE

Apart from showing the four prime attributes, the SCORE message gives
other important information. Refer back to the example above. The first line
is your `fullname' which also appears, together with those of any other
players, on the WHO message (see next section). It includes your name, your
level name, and any `prefix' you may have - Axeman's prefix is the word
"permanent". (See the spell PREFIX for more details.)

The second line of the SCORE message tells you exactly what you are - your
level, sex, race, and class. This may not be useful to you, but other people
can read your score and will need to know this.

The next line tells you your score itself, as described above. And the line
below - `Value/killed' shows the amount of points that someone would get if
they killed you in combat. (This is always 1/12 of your score.) Immortals do
not have this line in their score.

The next four lines (or three in the case of warriors) are the prime attri-
butes, as described above.

Next is the attribute `Charisma'. This reflects your popularity with the other
players. Newcomers start with charisma 0, and every week everyone gets a
chance to vote, using the commands LIKE and HATE, for the player they
most like or dislike. LIKE increases charisma by 1, whereas HATE decreases
it by 1. So for example if you typed LIKE "Axeman" his charisma would go
up to 3. Negative charismata are also possible! The charisma value provides
a way of finding out who the most popular and unpopular people are - type
LEAGUE LIKE or LEAGUE HATE to get a list of the `Top ten' and `Bottom ten'
people together with their charismata. Charisma also affects how mobiles
treat you (see below) - someone with a negative charisma is more in danger
from them!

The attribute `Kills' reflects how many mobiles and players you've killed. It
simply increases by one each time you win a fight: it never decreases. As a
result it permits keeping track of the most aggressive players: try LEAGUE
KILL for a list of the best killers.

`Weight held' is self-explanatory - the weight is in arbitrary units, in order
to make comparisons easier, and your `weight held' may not exceed your
current strength. Each object has a weight, which can be found out by
typing WEIGH <object> (e.g. WEIGH SWORD, WEIGH ALL) and the `weight held'
value is the sum of all the weights of the objects you're carrying.

Finally the `Spells' column lists any spells which may have been cast on you
(or which you have cast on yourself). Such spells will be further discussed
later.

Mobiles

These are objects which have the ability to move around - hence the name.
They wander the Realm in a random or semi-random fashion, collecting trea-
sure and fighting one another. If given the chance the wandering mobiles
will also fight you - so steer clear - and the stationary mobiles often form
part of a puzzle or trap. You can interact with them in much the same way
as with the other players - see below - but the mobiles tend to be less
talkative and much more agressive. There are several interesting spells that
people can use to take control of mobiles, though, so don't be surprised if
you find yourself having a chat with a troll or a demon! Like players, but
unlike normal objects, mobiles have the attributes score, strength, dexterity,
stamina and magic stamina (as described above).

The other players

The main advantage of a multi-user game is that you get to interact with
other players. Realm is a kind of r“le-playing environment where people can
act out their ideals - being brave, noble, or alternatively plain nasty. Ever-
yone should help low-level players to get started, or at least not interfere
with them (if anyone does, give a shout for the nearest Immortal who'll be
down on the evildoer like the proverbial ton of bricks) but remember that
the other people on the game have their own objectives and are trying to
collect the same treasure as you are. In spite of this there are plenty of
incentives for co-operation between players in Realm, including some puzzles
that can only be solved when two people go to work on them at once.

Interaction

There are a variety of ways in which you can interact with the other people
on the system. For a start, typing WHO (QW for short) will give you a list
of who's playing, together with their levels. SHOUT "message" will send a
message to everyone in the Realm (barring those who are currently deaf, in
prison, etc). while SAY "message" or simply typing "message" at the prompt
will convey the text to everyone in the same location as you. If you see the
message

A male voice shouts "Where's all the T?"

then you'll know that somebody has typed SHOUT "Where's all the T?" whe-
reas if you see a message saying

Bedivere says "Right, you've had it!"

you know that Bedivere typed "Right, you've had it!".

You may also address a remark to some particular person or creature in the
room by prefixing the speech with their name. For example, if you type BE-
DIVERE "What did I do wrong?" then everyone in the room will know that
it's him you're talking to.

There are various other commands (collectively known as emotes) which al-
low you to show your feelings (YAWN, GROWL, FROWN, SMILE, LAUGH, SOB,
BLUSH and so forth - there are large numbers of them, listed at the end of
the Guide). If Fred the Novice types GROAN everybody in the same room will
see the message `Fred groans.' and if he types SMILE "gently" then they'll
get the message `Fred smiles gently.' If you're feeling extravagantly emotio-
nal you might want to KISS people or HUG them, too.

Apart from this sort of thing you can transfer ownership of objects - GIVE
APPLE TO TOM, GIVE DICK T, STEAL ALL FROM HARRY (theft is not a socially
acceptable activity, and may result in your untimely demise if caught!) You
can also commit acts of gratuitous and mindless physical violence. Read on...

The fight system

Yes... this is what you've been waiting for! Realm contains an extensive and
unusual system for player/player combat; fighting, whether it be with other
players or with the computer-controlled mobiles, is one way to score a lot
of points. It's not easy to master and the novice would be advised to steer
clear of anything that looks remotely dangerous until he/she's gained
enough strength to fight with confidence. (The attributes affecting fighting
capacity are strength, dexterity and stamina. Dexterity affects how quickly
you can get a blow in and how well you can aim it, strength the damage it
does when it gets there and stamina the number of blows that you yourself
can take before dying.) Although other players shouldn't attack novices
(this is classed as bullying and may lose the offender his persona if
caught) the mobiles will see a low-level persona as easy meat. Be warned.

There are basically three ways in which one player can do harm to another
player or mobile. The first is violence outside a fight - typing HIT FRED (or
PUNCH, KICK, SLAP) will hurt him without actually starting combat, as will
BURN FRED if you have a lit torch or something similar. In the unlikely
event that you kill someone by doing this you score some points, but not
many. In any case the injured party (especially if a mobile) will probably
turn on you if you do this. Similar things include the SHOOT command,
which can only be used if you're outside a fight and which can be used to
wound somebody in your location or the neighbouring ones, providing you're
armed with a bow of some sort (see the SELECT command, described below).
You can also THROW <object> AT <person> both inside and outside a fight.

The second method involves casting spells on somebody, which is discussed
later. It's the third method we're interested in here. This involves starting
combat by typing KILL <person> (of course, if you're attacked by someone
else, you won't have the option as to whether you want to fight or not).
You will get the message `You are now fighting the dragon.' (or whatever)
and you'll be in a situation where a ravening monster is out for your blood.
Combat is the most dangerous situation you can be in on Realm, as you run
the risk of losing half your points if killed.

Although a one-on-one combat situation is the most common, the Realm fight
system allows more than two people at a time to join in a combat. You may
well find yourself in a situation where two mobiles are attacking you, or
conversely you may want to team up with other players to take on a tough
mobile. You can only actually fight one person at a time, and this player or
mobile - the one you are facing - is referred to as `your opponent' below.
This creature is either the first mobile to attack you, or the person you
named in a KILL command. So, for example, if the kobold1 attacks you, and
then the kobold2 joins in, your opponent will still be the kobold1. If you
then want to aim blows at the kobold2 (for example, because you've killed
the kobold1 or put him out of action with a SLEEP spell) you would type
KILL KOBOLD2.

If someone else is fighting you you may not leave by typing a direction
command in the normal way. (If you are fighting someone, but they are not
fighting you - for example if they are aiming blows at someone else, or if
they are asleep - you may just walk away.) Under such circumstances you
must use FLEE <direction> which causes you to run for your life in the gi-
ven direction. This is the most important combat command for a novice to
know! You drop everything in your haste and you also lose some points for
your cowardice, but it's better than being dead. (If somebody FLEEs while
you're fighting them, you gain some points, but not as many as if you'd kil-
led them outright.) Low-level players can use the INVOKE command to call on
the Gods for assistance during a fight (or indeed at other times).

Selecting a weapon

Assuming you want to stand and fight, though, you'll probably need some
sort of weapon. The SELECT command allows you to decide which of the
weapons that you're carrying you want to use, and it's probably best to do
this before you get into a fight. Typing SELECT <weapon> will arm you with
the named weapon, while SELECT 2 <weapon> will allow you to have another
weapon in your left hand. Typing SELECT on its own will tell you how
you're armed. An example of the use of this command follows (SELECT can
be abbreviated to SEL).

>SELECT
You are armed with the halberd (double-handed).
>DROP HALBERD
Dropped the halberd.
>SEL
You are unarmed.
>INVENTORY
Fred has the sabre, the knife, the conch and the pyramid.
>SEL SABRE
You are armed with the sabre.
>SEL 2 KNIFE
You are armed with the sabre and the knife.

Fred is now ready to do battle. Note the double-handed halberd; using a
two-handed weapon means, obviously, that you can't SELECT 2 <object> at
the same time. You can find out the relative powers of the weapons by
using VALUE <object> : for example, if Fred typed VALUE SABRE he'd be gi-
ven the following message

The sabre
Value : 0
Slash value : 50
Lunge value : 20
Hit value : 5
Parry value : 40

and he'd know that the best thing to do with the sabre would be to slash
with it (as opposed to striking or lunging). We'll now come to the commands
that allow you to do this.

Starting a blow

There are three commands that allow you to aim a blow at someone in a
fight: STRIKE, LUNGE and SLASH (usually abbreviated to ST, LU and SL re-
spectively). These are coupled with a part of your opponent's body: HEAD,
CHEST, MIDDLE, or LEGS (abbreviated to H, C, M and LE). So to aim a slash
at your opponent's legs, do SLASH LEGS or SL LE. To lunge at his chest,
type LU C. (Obviously the faster you get these commands in, the better.)
You're not allowed to use all three types of blow with every weapon; you
can't slash with the mace, for example, or lunge with the battleaxe. If you
have no weapon at all, you can only use STRIKE (ST), and this is also the
case if you're a Priest, since you're not allowed to use edged weapons. You
can use your secondary weapon, if you have one (the one you selected with
SELECT 2 <weapon>) by putting a 2 into the command. For example, if your
secondary weapon was the rapier, you might type LU 2 M to stab at your
opponent's middle. And Rangers may use their third weapon - their feet -
by using STRIKE 3 <area> to aim a combat kick. This can't be combined with
another blow - you can't have a kick and a cut with your sword going at
the same time, for the obvious reason that you'd cut your foot off if you
didn't fall over first.

Once you've aimed a blow it takes a little while to hit (imagine the command
you've typed as your orders to your arms, which then have to be physically
carried out) and it's not a good idea to aim another blow with the same
weapon while you're still waiting for the first one to take effect, or you'll
just end up flailing at the air. When it does hit, you'll be given a message
by the computer indicating the damage done:

The orc1 is sent sprawling by your powerful lunge at his chest with the
rapier.

This is where you want to get in another blow quickly. Remember, your op-
ponent will be doing the same thing to you, and you'll be getting messages
along the following lines:

Snarling the orc1 aims a vicious cut at your head with the knife.

and then a few seconds later

The orc's nasty slash at your head with the knife wounds you badly.
Stamina = 48/104.

If more than one creature is fighting you, you'll get similar messages telling
you what they're doing and what damage is being done to you.

Another way of damaging someone with an object in a fight is by using the
THROW command (e.g. THROW KNIFE). This applies especially to Rangers who
get bonuses when using such weapons. You may miss, or your opponent may
dodge (depending on his or her dexterity), but otherwise you stand a good
chance of doing them an injury. If you want to throw a weapon at a person
you're not currently fighting, use THROW <weapon> AT <person>.

Stamina and death

If your blows succeed in bringing your opponent's `stamina' attribute to ze-
ro or below, he or she will die. All mobiles and players have a fixed value
in points (for players, about 1/12 of their total score - this is the `Va-
lue/killed' attribute in your SCORE) and these points are shared equally
among all the people fighting the creature in question - no matter how much
they contributed to the fight. All these people's `kills' attributes will be in-
creased by one.

On the other hand, if your stamina falls to zero or below, you will die and
lose half your points (which can be a crushing blow!) - this means that you
automatically go down a level, unless you are already on level 1. Obviously
it's important to maintain your stamina, and there are several ways of doing
this. The first method is to ensure that it doesn't go down in the first pla-
ce. Wearing armour helps here, and there are several pieces of this knoc-
king around. VALUEing a piece of armour gives you some idea of its
strength.

Another method of warding off blows (if you're a fast typist or have func-
tion keys) is to use the PARRY command (abbreviated to PA) which blocks an
opponent's blow. In the example given above where the orc was aiming a
blow at your head you'd want to get in a PA H (short for PARRY HEAD) be-
fore the blow took effect. Depending on your strength and dexterity compa-
red to your opponent's, and on the parry value of the weapon you're using
to block with, you may be able to block the blow and stop it doing you any
damage. It's often a good idea to have a good parrying weapon, such as the
buckler, as your secondary weapon; then you can do PA 2 H to block the
blow coming at your head and at the same time LU CH (or whatever) to aim
a counterblow. Parrying tends to work best against human opponents, and in
some cases a fight can become completely deadlocked with each fighter
parrying the other's blows and neither being able to wound the other. In
this case one or the other will probably resort to casting spells. Parrying
will not work against other people's blows, if more than one is attacking
you, but only on your opponent's.

The second method of maintaining stamina is to restore it once it's been
knocked down. EATing food is a good way of doing this; SLEEPing will re-
store stamina too, but is not a good idea in a battle! DRINKing certain
things restores a small amount of stamina, and GETing the Philosopher's
stone will help as well. Yet another method is to use the HEAL spell, dis-
cussed in the next section, or to get someone to cast it on you. Of course,
if you take time off to do any of these things, your enemy will probably get
in a couple of extra blows...

As you can see, fighting is a complicated business. Some players avoid it
completely (either for moral reasons, because they just aren't very good at
it, or both), while others revel in bloodshed and mayhem and count their
`kills' attribute more important than their score. Unfortunately, it's not
enough to be a pacifist, as you're still likely to be attacked by those eager
to score points off you. Always carry a weapon or be quick on the FLEE
command unless you're sure you're safe.

Ranger abilities

In past versions of Realm the class of Ranger hasn't had as much attention
as it's deserved. Its main drawback, of course, is that it offers no chances
to use magic: unlike a Warrior, a Ranger can't convert to Magic user or
Priest through his heroism. But magic users are a puny lot when it comes
to combat, and not much good at the subtler skills of pinching things from
people or plugging them with crossbow bolts. The members of the Assassins'
Guild, recently formed as I write this, find a Ranger's high dexterity a po-
sitive advantage in their line of work. (Their current Guildmaster is a Half-
ling Master Ranger and his dexterity is well into the 300's!) And Rangers do
have some abilities - equivalent to the spells of other classes - which are
quite unique. These are listed below.

The listed values of `Cost' refer to the amount of Concentration points the
ability takes up. If you haven't got this amount, you won't be able to use
the ability. A novice Ranger will start with about 50 Concentration: like the
other attributes, though, it increases as you move through the levels. It's
restored mostly by SLEEPing.

Ability	Cost
DEXTERITY <number>	<number>
With this ability the user may boost his dexterity by <number> for a
short time. Both the time and the maximum possible amount of dexterity
points depend on his/her level. Useful for thefts, fights and so on.
PICK (<door>)	5
Allows the Ranger to try to pick the lock of a door. There are some
doors which you won't be able to open, and depending on your level it
may take you several tries.
RESIST	30
Causes the user to develop an aura of magical resistance. This is in
addition to the normal resistance that all non-magic users (and magic
users to a lesser extent) have to spells. Bear in mind that spells with
a physical effect will not be resisted (e.g. ZAP, involving a fairly
physical bolt of fire).
STRENGTH <number>	<number>
Is very similar to DEXTERITY, but obviously works on your strength in-
stead. Useful for carrying heavy loads for a short time, and of course
in fights.
TRACK <mobile>	10
Allows you, from tracks nearby and so on, to locate the named mobile.
Lower levels will get a general area (e.g. TRACK HAG - The hag is in
the north of the Realm). As you move up you'll get more precise loca-
tions, and other useful information - The hag is in Stilton Gorge, which
is in the north of the Realm. She is injured. She is carrying one ob-
ject. Compare this with the magic users' WHERE spell.

Magic users and spell-casting

As mentioned above, this is a land where magic works, and being able to
work it is a considerable advantage. It is possible to begin the game as a
Wizard or Priest, but this leaves you at a disadvantage where combat is
concerned, since you've presumably had little time in the course of your
studies to train in the martial arts. Alternatively you can begin as a War-
rior or Ranger - but you'll find it difficult to reach the heights of Immor-
tality without magic to help you. If you're a Warrior, though, you are all-
owed the chance to prove yourself worthy to become a magic user of one
sort or another (unless you're a half-orc or other evil race, in which case
the Guild of Priests and Wizards won't accept you for training). There are
several ways to `prove yourself worthy' - most involve killing powerful
monsters - and Warriors normally have to take a short time out of the game
to learn the necessary skills. It is important to note that Rangers cannot
train for magic user status, or for the priesthood - it's assumed that the
skills they have learnt are not compatible with the ones they'd need. Nei-
ther can a Priest or Wizard retrain to become another character class, in
the normal course of things. There are certain ways to get temporary ma-
gic-user status, though, which are open to everyone.

Magic users (Wizards and Priests) have an attribute which other classes
don't; magic stamina. This is related to the normal stamina - they have the
same maximum value - but decreases when spells are cast. The cost of a
spell is the amount of points it takes off your magic stamina when you cast
it. If your magic stamina falls below zero, you lose your magical powers
(and revert, or are demoted, to Warrior class), so it's necessary to be very
careful, especially if casting one of the spells with variable cost.

The Spell Book

There now follows a list of the spells available to the various character
classes. This is similar to, though longer than the lists provided by HELP
/S, HELP /P and HELP /W: on the other hand, there may be one or two
spells which aren't covered by this list. The three numbers beside the na-
mes of the spells indicate

(1)	The difficulty of the spell. Multiply this by your level number to get
some idea of the percentage chance of the spell's working. For example,
the number in the first column for the DEAF spell is 8: so a third level
magic user would have an 8 x 3 = 24% chance of getting it to work.
Note that if a spell is cast on another person (or mobile) they will have
a chance to resist it, and if they do then the spell will fail anyway
(and may rebound on the caster). A spell cast on an Immortal will al-
ways fail: Immortals can cast any spell available to their character
class without having to worry about the difficulty.

(2)	The cost of the spell, in terms of magic stamina. If there's a `+' after
the cost the spell may cost more, depending on what it's cast on. For
example the Wizards' spell SUMMON has a listed cost of 20+, but could
cost up to around 40 if cast on a high level player or mobile.

(3)	The minimum level you must have reached before you can cast the
spell. For example, you can't cast the POSSESS spell until you're 5th
level or above. If no figure is given in this column you can cast the
spell at any level.

Spells available to all magic users

These spells are fairly general in nature and are available to both Wizards
and Priests. Where the spell is marked with an asterisk * it cannot be cast
at a distance, i.e. the specified object or mobile must be in the same loca-
tion as you. Note that if an object or mobile is not in your location when
you cast a spell on it, then the spell will fail if he/she/it is in one of the
`forbidden' locations: these are areas which Mortal magic cannot affect.

Spell		Percentage	Cost	Level
BLIND <mobile>	5	10
Strikes the specified mobile/player blind.
CRIPPLE <mobile>	5	10
Stops the mobile/player from being able to move.
DEAF <mobile>	8	7
Makes the mobile/player unable to hear.
DISENCHANT (<mobile>)	6/8	14/12	2/1
Removes all spells cast on the specified mobile or player -that is all
spells which have a lasting effect, such as GLOW, CRIPPLE, BLIND, INVI-
SIBLE, SHIELD - which could be cast by the caster of the DISENCHANT
spell (Priests can't remove INVISIBLE, for example). If no player or mo-
bile name is given it works on the caster. The left set of numbers is
for casting the spell on someone else, the right hand set for casting it
on yourself (obviously it's easier to cast a spell on yourself!)
DISPOSSESS <mobile>	3	40	3
Stops somebody possessing the specified mobile. See POSSESS.
DUMB <mobile>	9	7
Strikes the mobile/player dumb. Note that you can't cast certain spells
while dumb (you can cast DISENCHANT!)
GLOW (<mobile>)	10	12
Causes the mobile/player in question to glow, allowing him/her to see
in the dark. If no name is given, works on the caster.
POSSESS <mobile>	1	60	5
A very powerful spell allowing complete takeover of a player or mobile.
Once this spell has been cast your commands will act on the mobile as
though they were his/her own (with certain restrictions) until QUIT is
typed or the spell wears off. You will still see things that are happe-
ning in your location but you are obviously in a vulnerable position
while using this spell, so take care.
PREFIX <player> "<text>"	2	2
Gives the player specified the specified prefix. So PREFIX BEDIVERE
"chivalrous" would give make Bedivere's full name "Bedivere the chi-
valrous Enchanter." Not one of the most useful spells, but fun.
PRISON <mobile>	1	50	5
Sends the person on whom the spell is cast to the Wizards' Dungeon,
whence it is extremely difficult to escape (and you lose points if you
QUIT from it).
SCORE | QS <mobile>	8	5
Gives the specified mobile/player's score details. QS gives them in a
shortened form. QS and SCORE, on their own, give the same information
about you, but don't count as spells.
SLEEP <mobile>* 	12	15	2
Sends the named player or mobile to sleep (though it may rebound on
you!) SLEEP on its own is the command to go to sleep voluntarily; this
gains you some stamina but puts you in an unsafe position.
TELL <mob> "message"	25	1
Gives the specified player/mobile the message, telepathically. (`Ryke's
voice says in your mind "hello there!"' is the sort of message you'd
get.)
WHERE <object>	18	2
Tells you the location of an object, in the form of a short room name.
This is one of the most useful spells available! It will tell you the name
even if the location is `forbidden'.
WHERE <location>	5	15
Tells you the location of a location, in general terms (e.g. WHERE
"CLEARING" tells you "in the central part of the Realm.") This can be
useful, for example if you've just found that the staff is in `Wet passa-
ge' (by typing WHERE STAFF) and haven't the faintest idea where `Wet
passage' is! <location> may be either a location name in quotes or a lo-
cation number. Some locations are completely detatched from the Realm.

Wizards' Spells

The following list shows the spells available to Wizards only - not priests.
These spells are mostly concerned with manipulating objects and attacking
other creatures.

Spell		Percentage	Cost	Level
CALL <object>	6	10+	2
Allows you to call any inanimate object to your location, subject to the
following restrictions:
(1)	Mortals are not allowed access to certain locations.
	(2)	Certain objects will resist the CALL spell.
	(3)	You can't CALL an object that a mobile or player is carrying.
	(4)	CALLing treasure is a lot more expensive in terms of magic stami-
na.
	(5)	Objects cannot be called from `forbidden' locations such as the Wi-
zards' Room.
Note also that CALLing a category, (e.g. CALL WEAPON, CALL T) will al-
most certainly reduce the caster's magic stamina to zero and cause
him/her to lose his/her spell-casting ability.
CHANGE <mobile>	3	5	3
Changes the mobile in question's sex, male to female or vice versa. If
the spell is resisted it will work on the caster - you have been war-
ned!
EXPLODE <mobile>*	2	40	4
Causes the specified mobile to explode, removing them from the game
without losing them any points (even if used in a fight). Quite a drama-
tic spell.
ILLUSION <mobile> "message"	2	4
Gives the specified player (or mobile!) the message as if it came di-
rectly from the game. So ILLUS BEDIVERE "You are attacked by an ele-
ven-foot king Cobra!" would give Bedivere the impression that he was
writhing in the coils of the loathsome reptile. (To be able to create the
real thing, you'll have to be Immortal...)
INVISIBLE (<mobile>)	3	40	4
Makes the specified player or mobile, or the caster if no name is given,
invisible - obviously conferring some advantage in fights, stealing etc.
This spell will wear off after some time unless cast on someone who's
Immortal.
LB <mobile>*	8	25
Throws a bolt of lightning at a mobile. Similar to ZAP (see below) this
is more powerful, more costly, and more difficult to cast.
MOVE <object> <location>	5	20+	3
Changes the location of the object in question to the specified place
(locations are specified as in ZIP, below). The spell costs according to
the value of the object (or, if a mobile, according to its level). The sa-
me sort of restrictions apply to this spell as do to CALL, described
earlier.
NOWALL		4	28	3
Removes all magic walls in your location (these are created by WOF or
WOS which are described below).
PUSH <mobile> <direction> 	7	20
Forces the specified player/mobile to move in the given direction (but
not in a direction they couldn't normally move). Eg PUSH TROLL NORTH.
SHATTER <object>*	4	15+	2
Destroys objects. Destroying weapons or treasures can cost you more
points - don't try to shatter the diamond or Excalibur, for example!
SUMMON <mobile>	7	20+	3
This spell allows you to call any creature or player to your location.
The cost of this spell is related to the level or power of the player or
mobile you summon, and the spell may be resisted. You can't summon
things from the `forbidden' locations.
VORPAL <weapon>*	2	20	3
For use on edged weapons only. It makes them more dangerous.
WEIGH <object> <value>	1	30	7
Changes an object's weight. <value> is a new weight, in Realm units.
This is the only spell to directly manipulate an object's attributes avai-
lable to Mortals. WEIGH <object> on its own, without a <value>, will
show the object's current weight and is not a spell.
WOF <direction>	2	60	4
Creates a wall of fire in the given direction. Those who try to walk
through it will lose stamina and may die.
WOS <direction>	2	60	4
Creates a wall of stone in the given direction. WOS N would block off
the north exit to a room, for example. Walls of Stone are completely im-
passable unless a NOWALL spell is used.
ZAP or BLAST <mobile>*	10	15
Throws a bolt of fire at a mobile/player, knocking points off his/her
stamina according to caster's level. This can be effective if used in
combat. (If you kill someone with ZAP outside a fight you score a few
points, as is the situation with HIT, BURN, etc.)
ZIP <location>	6	30	2
Transports you about the Realm. <location> must be either
	(1)	An object name, in which case the spell will take you to the object
(e.g. ZIP SWORD),
	(2)	A room name in double quotes (e.g. ZIP "clearing", ZIP "stilton
gorge") where the spell will take you to this location (if it exists),
or
	(3)	A location number. This is of little use unless you have a very
good map (or you are Immortal, in which case you will see the lo-
cation numbers of rooms as you enter them).
Note that Mortals cannot zip to the `forbidden' locations.

Priests' Spells

The following list shows the spells available to Priests but not wizards.
These spells are to do with the powers of the mind and the occult for the
most part, though there are some exceptions.

Spell		Percentage	Cost	Level
BLESS <mobile>	1	70	9
Makes the person on whom the spell is cast immune to mobile attack. It
also lifts the action of the CURSE spell. This spell doesn't make you in-
vulnerable - players can still attack you and you still stand a chance
of dying if you start a fight yourself.
CONJURE		2	80	6
Summons up a netherworld creature - a zombie, ghoul or fiend, depen-
ding on your level - which you can command as if he had been SUB-
DUEd (see below). May turn on you, if you are weak, to gain his free-
dom, so this spell is not without danger for the low-level priest.
CURSE <mobile>	1	30	3
Makes victim extremely vulnerable to mobile attack (they attack on
sight, in fact...) Both BLESS and CURSE, if cast by high-level priests or
Immortals, may be permanent in effect.
EXORCISE <mobile>*	4	40	4
Return the mobile in question, if a demon or undead type, to the spirit
world. If the spell fails, the mobile will resent it and the caster will
probably fall asleep for some time.
HEAL (<mobile>) <number>	6	0+
Adds <number> points to someone's stamina while deducting twice that
number from the caster's magic stamina. If used without a name (e.g.
HEAL 20) this spell works on the caster.
MBOLT <mobile>*	6	15
Blasts the specified mobile with mental energy. Similar in its effects to
ZAP, which is described above in the section on Wizards' spells.
MOPEN		10	15	3
An unusual spell for a priest in that it deals with the physical world.
If there is a door in the location, it will usually cause it to open.
PRAY "message"
A special command - not a true spell - which enables priests to call on
the Gods for assistance. Any God currently around will be under obli-
gation to come to your aid. Those who misuse the command, though, will
find the wrath of the Gods hard to survive! Anybody can use the PRAY
command, but Gods will only hear it long-distance if a priest uses it.
SAP <mobile>*	10	20	2
Saps the strength of the named mobile, its effectiveness depending on
the level of the user. It may cause the victim to drop heavy objects or
to fall asleep for some time.
SHIELD (<mobile>)*	4	50	3
Creates a magical shield round the named mobile (or the caster) which
protects him/her/it from lower level spells and - to some extent - 
from injury by weapon. It wears off after some time.
SUBDUE <mobile>	3	60	5
Forces the named mobile to obedience to your will. It will then obey
any commands spoken directly to it (eg ORC "GIVE ME SWORD" will or-
der the orc to hand over the sword) though it may seek to escape your
control. The spell will not work on mobiles that would not understand
speech (e.g. the sparrow, the blob) and some intelligent ones will auto-
matically resist it.
VIEW <location>	4	10
Allows you to see a location as if you were in it. <location> is either
an object name (VIEW TROLL shows you the room the troll's in at the
moment) or a location name in quotes (VIEW "Watchtower" shows you
what the watchtower looks like) or a location number (see the Wizard
spell ZIP). You cannot view `forbidden' locations.

How to cope with Immortality

Once your score reaches 204,800 points you are Immortal. Although this is
the object of the game, playing Realm doesn't stop here - you can still get
a lot of enjoyment out of playing as an Immortal.

There are a number of differences between playing as a Mortal and as an
Immortal. These are

(1)	The most obvious : you will no longer die in fights. In fact, there are
very few things that can actually wound you any more. Note however
that you can still be killed by puzzles and traps, but this doesn't mat-
ter as you'll be resurrected in the normal way anyway.

(2)	You can no longer score points (or lose points) - this means that the-
re's no chance of your advancing any further in levels without the
Gods' taking a hand. The rank of Demigod or Demigoddess is only awar-
ded to those who have made a really significant contribution to the ga-
me (in terms of hours played, locations designed, moral uprightness or
large cash sums to the author - hehe...).

(3)	Those Immortals of magic user class - Wizards, Witches, Arch-Priests
and Arch-Priestesses - will be able to cast any spell that they could
have cast while Mortal, but will have 100% chance of getting it to work
and will not lose any magic stamina by doing so. Spells cast by Mortals
on Immortals will always fail (apart from `physical' spells like ZAP) :
spells cast by Immortals on Mortals will always succeed. Spells cast by
Immortals on other Immortals of the same rank will have exactly 50%
chance of success: spells cast on lower ranking Immortals will always
succeed, whereas spells cast on higher ranking Immortals will always
fail. Gods and Demigods can cast spells of either class, and certain
Ranger abilities are available to them.

(4)	All Immortals, whether they be magic users or not, can cast the Immor-
tal spells which allow them to make fairly substantial changes to the
game - creating and destroying objects, renaming existing objects and
changing their attributes and so on. When you're Immortal you'll be ab-
le to use the HELP /I command, which will explain about these spells in
more detail.

(5)	Immortals will not be affected by certain puzzles and traps. Neither will
mobiles attack them or steal from them (they've got more sense!)

(6)	Immortals get certain messages about important events going on in the
land which Mortals don't see. For example, they're told all the text
which goes on the game log for the Coders to read after the game is
shut down.

When you become an Immortal your best plan is to contact a Demigod or
God, who'll be able to tell you more about the powers and responsibilities of
your position.

Hints and Tips

While we don't want to spoil the enjoyment you'll get from Realm, a few
hints are probably useful to get you going.

Drop treasure in the lake as soon as you get it; mobiles and other players
will try to steal it from you. The quickest way to get to the lake is by
going OUT until you get to the clearing, then walking round the mountain to
the southeast and south until you find a place where it's climbable.

While you're a low-level player, avoid mobiles like the plague. As you get
towards 7th level you'll find they're easier to deal with (you'll then be
superior in strength, if not in combat ability, to the majority of wandering
monsters). Mobiles will give you a chance when you're a very low scorer:
they will not generally attack anyone with zero score.

While you'll find some treasures lying around in the main land, the really
valuable stuff is to be found in the further reaches of the Realm. Don't try
and explore these areas too early, though - there are a lot of traps and
monsters knocking around in the depths of the caves under the Mountain or
Hamlet's Caverns.

Don't wander around in the dark without a light. Most mobiles can see in
the dark quite well, but you can't. If you get totally lost in the dark a ma-
gic user will probably be able to cast a GLOW spell on you if you ask ni-
cely.

Be careful when going to sea - bad weather can kill you off, and there are
various hazards out there for the unwary.

It's a good idea - especially for a beginner - to start as a Warrior and be-
come a magic user later. That way you get the best of both worlds - you
get fighting strength when you need it, when you're low level and vulne-
rable to mobile attack, and then have the chance to become a magic user
later on while retaining the strength you built up as a Warrior.

Rangers should try to use their special bonuses in STEALing, THROWing, and
abilities like ST 3 wherever possible. It can often make a difference!

You'll probably get the most out of the game if you try and stay in charac-
ter, r“le-playing as much as possible (especially when others are around) -
this also helps to improve the game's `atmosphere'.

Finally, if you have any comments, suggestions, or queries, get in touch
with a Demigod or God (contact me as "Ryke"). We'll be happy to help you.

Useful commands

This is a summary of (most of) the commands available in Realm at the time
of writing. For more detailed information about their syntax use HELP /U,
HELP /E, HELP /S, HELP /W, HELP /P and HELP /I.

Simplest commands

BRIEF	BURN	CLOSE	CUT	DIG	DROP
DRINK	EAT	EMPTY	EXAMINE	EXITS	EXTINGUISH
FILL	FLEE	FOLLOW	GET	GIVE	HATE
HIT	HELP	INVENTORY	JUMP	KEEP	KICK
KILL	LEVELS	LEAGUE	LIKE	LIGHT	LOOK
LOSE	LUNGE	OPEN	PARRY	PUT	PULL
PUNCH	QL	QS	QUIT	QW	READ
SAY	SCORE	SELECT	SHOUT	SHOOT	SING
SLAP	SLASH	SLEEP	STEAL	STRIKE	TAKE
TAKE OFF	THROW	VALUE	VERBOSE	WAVE	WEAR
WEIGH	WHISPER	WHO	WISH	X

`Emotes'

BLINK	BLUSH	BOW	CACKLE	CHUCKLE	COWER
CRY	FROWN	GIGGLE	GRIMACE	GRIN	GROAN
GRUNT	GROWL	HICCUP	HUG	HOWL	KISS
KNEEL	LAUGH	NOD	POUT	QUIVER	SCREAM
SHAKE	SHIVER	SHRIEK	SMILE	SNEER	SNIFF
SOB	WAVE	WEEP	WINK	YAWN

Spells for all

BLIND	CRIPPLE	DEAF	DISENCHANT	DISPOSSESS	DUMB
GLOW	POSSESS	PREFIX	PRISON	QS	SCORE
SLEEP	TELL	WHERE

Wizards' Spells

BLAST	CALL	CHANGE	EXPLODE	ILLUSION	INVISIBLE
LB	MOVE	NOWALL	PUSH	SHATTER	SUMMON
VORPAL	WEIGH	WOF	WOS	ZAP	ZIP

Priests' Spells

BLESS	CONJURE	CURSE	EXORCISE	HEAL	MBOLT
MOPEN	PRAY	SAP	SHIELD	SUBDUE	VIEW

Immortals' Spells

ARENA	BAN	BLOT	BYE	BURNS	CHANGE
CONTDESC	DESCRIBE	DISRUPT	EXTINGUISHABLE	FLAMMABLE
LIQUID	LIT	MAKE	PEACE	REMOVE	RENAME
SNOOP	SQUASH	STOPFIGHT	SUPERSNOOP	SUFFIX	TWOHAND
VALUE	WAR	WEARABLE	WEATHER

Realm Glossary

Just a brief explanation of the meaning of some Realm jargon.

Attributes :	These are the values which determine your physical and men-
tal power in Realm. The four most important (the `prime attri-
butes') are strength, dexterity, stamina, and magic stamina or
concentration. See the section on attributes for more details.

Charisma :	This attribute of personae is a measure of how popular they
are. Everybody's allowed to vote, once a week, for someone
they either like or dislike (using the LIKE and HATE com-
mands). Charisma affects, among other things, how likely it is
for a mobile to attack you. Charisma is an Attribute (see abo-
ve).

Coder :		Someone who's involved in the physical running of the game.
Personae with Coder status are able to access features of
Realm that others cannot reach.

Death :		There are three types of Death in Realm. If you're killed by a
puzzle or trap you're simply thrown off the game and back to
the front end menu - you can log on again though you'll have
lost anything you were carrying. If you're killed by someone
else outside a fight you lose a handful of points but are
otherwise unharmed. If you die during a fight you lose half
your points - this normally means dropping down a level, and
is the most catastrophic thing that can happen to you in
Realm.

Gods :		God(dess) and Demigod(dess) are high ranks, needing scores
of 409,600 points and up. Nobody actually attains these ranks
in the course of the game - they are given out by the ex-
isting high-ranking personae when they deem that some per-
sona has made an outstanding contribution to Realm. New Gods
are very rare indeed: people of God rank are generally
system administrators.

Immortal :	A general term for anybody whose score is 204,800 or above.
They are so called because they can't be killed in fights.

Lake :		Where you drop treasure, on top of the mountain. To `lake' an
object means to drop it in the lake. Hence the phrase "I'm off
to lake some T."

Log :		All the most important occurrences in the game are logged -
they're recorded on disc for the Coders to read. This means
that we can check up on people who are doing things they
shouldn't.

Magic user :	A term used to mean either a Wizard (see below) or anyone
who can use magic (a Priest, a Wizard, or somebody who's
found a magical object, of which there are one or two scatte-
red about the Realm).

Mobile :		A computer-controlled creature which roams about the land
collecting treasure and fighting people weaker than itself. So-
me mobiles are in fact stationary, but they all come under the
same heading.

Mortal :		A player who hasn't yet reached the rank of Immortal (and is
consequently liable to be killed).

Priest :		A magic-using character class with certain special restrictions
on them (cannot use edged weapons, for example); quite good
in combat but with less spells available to them than to Wi-
zards.

Ranger :		A character class which is good in combat, being strong and
dexterous. Can not normally change to a magic using class,
unlike warriors (see below). Has certain special abilities.

Resets :		These currently occur every hour or so. It's basically when
all the laked treasure and all the slain mobiles are returned
to their original locations. Puzzles are reset, weapons are re-
located, mazes are rebuilt and the Realm is generally tidied
up. You are taken out of the game while this happens: it can
take anything up to a minute, depending on what sort of a
system Realm is running on! On some systems the game will
shut down after an hour, rather than resetting.

T :			Treasure. Collecting this is the main method of scoring points.
The most valuable treasures are protected by mobiles or
puzzles.

Warrior :		The standard character class. No special abilities, but quite
good in combat. Can become a magic user by performing one
or more heroic deeds.

Wizard :		A magic-using character class that is weak in combat but has
many spells available.
